basic information about portal_actions (#1371)
plone/documentation: docs/backend/portal-actions.md

## Expressions

An expression is a piece of code that is evaluated at runtime and can be used to insert dynamic values into the URL or provide the decision for the condition.

```{todo}
Contribute to this documentation!
A chapter about expressions is missing. As soon as it exists a link to this chapter needs to be placed here.
See issue [Backend > missing chapter Expressions needs content](https://github.com/plone/documentation/issues/1370).
```

## Adding or editing portal actions

To add or edit portal actions, you can use the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel.
To access this, log in to your Plone site as a user with the appropriate permissions.
Then select the menu item {menuselection}`[username] > Site Setup`.
From there, click on the {guilabel}`Actions` link in the {guilabel}`General` section.
You can also select {menuselection}`General > Actions` from the Site Setup or any other control panel.

Once you are on the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel, you will see a list of all the existing portal actions for your site.
To inspect or edit an existing action's settings, click its {guilabel}`Edit` button.

> ```{image} _static/backend/portal-actions-edit-settings.png

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{image} /_static/backend/portal-actions-edit-settings.png
```

# Portal Actions

Actions are links or buttons that allow users to perform specific actions on your site.
These actions can be anything from viewing a content item to editing a page, to accessing a specific feature of your site.

```{note}

> There are at least two providers for actions, the `portal_actions` tool and the content type actions defined in the several Factory Type Information's under the `portal_workflow` tool.

Reviewer: I would like clarification of these two tools and how to reach them. I see both [`portal_actions`](https://6-classic.demo.plone.org/portal_actions/manage_main) and [`portal_workflow`](https://6-classic.demo.plone.org/portal_workflow/manage_selectWorkflows) in the [ZMI](https://6-classic.demo.plone.org/manage_main), and ["Actions"](https://6-classic.demo.plone.org/@@actions-controlpanel) in the Site Setup. Is that correct?

If so, then I think it would be good to include the mention of the ZMI in the introductory paragraph.

Author: Oh my, I meant portal_types. No idea how I got to workflow. Yes, I will refine this.

Author: I refined this, please have a look if its now better to understand.

Here the portal actions are described.
```

Portal actions are typically displayed in the site's navigation menu or toolbar and can be accessed by users with the appropriate permissions.

> Portal actions are managed using the {guilabel}`Portal Actions` control panel in Plone.

Reviewer: I noticed that we call this "Actions" in the UI.

https://6-classic.demo.plone.org/@@overview-controlpanel

![Screen Shot 2022-12-12 at 11 39 13 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/207255066-a461b0f5-7903-4d3d-91c2-2ef277be45b1.png)

But on its page title, it is called "Portal actions".

![Screen Shot 2022-12-12 at 11 40 35 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/207255199-0b0effd2-4b7e-4522-8692-8acbce861ab4.png)

I think we need to mention that "Portal actions" and "Actions" are the same thing in Classic UI in the introduction paragraph. I've added a `note` accordingly.

> This control panel allows you to add, edit, and delete actions, as well as organize them into categories and control where they are available on your site.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
This control panel allows you to add, edit, and delete actions, as well as organize them into categories and control where they are available on your site.

```{note}
We use the terms "Portal actions" and "Actions" in this documentation to mean the same thing.
```
````

## Anatomy of a Portal action

> A portal action in Plone consists of a few different components, including the category, title, description, URL, and control parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A portal action in Plone consists of a few settings, including the category, title, description, URL, and control parameters.
```

> The action title is the text that is displayed for the action in the site's navigation menu or toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The action {guilabel}`Title` is the text that is displayed for the action in the site's navigation menu or toolbar.
```

This text should be descriptive and indicate what the action does.

> The description is used as an additional text shown when hovering over the link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Description` is used as an additional text shown when hovering over the link.
```

> The title and description can be translated using the translation system of Plone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Title` and {guilabel}`Description` can be translated using the translation system of Plone.
```

> Therefore the i18n domain can be set here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore the {guilabel}`I18n domain` can be set here.
```

> The Action URL is the address of the page or feature that the action will access when it is clicked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Action URL` is the address of the page or feature that the action will access when it is clicked.
```

This can be an internal page on your site or an external page on another website.

> The "Condition" controls whether to show the action or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Condition` controls whether to show the action or not.
```

> You can use expressions in the URL of an action to make the action more dynamic and flexible. Expressions are also used for the "Condition".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use expressions in the URL of an action to make the action more dynamic and flexible.
Expressions are also used for the {guilabel}`Condition`.
```

> The permissions chosen also control the visibility of an action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Permissions` chosen also control the visibility of an action.
```

> Visibility can be used to hide actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Visible?` setting can be used to show or hide actions.
```

This can be handy to disable default actions or temporarily disable actions.

> The "Position" is used to order action within their category and is numbered starting with "1".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {guilabel}`Position` setting is used to order actions within their category, and is numbered starting with `1`.
```

Together, these components make up a portal action in Plone.

> You can use the "Portal Actions" control panel to manage and organize your site's actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel to manage and organize your site's actions.
```

## Action categories

> Several different action categories are used for different purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several action categories are used for different purposes.
```

These categories include:

Object Actions

> : `Actions that are available when viewing a specific content item.`

Reviewer: I think these are definitions of the terms, not inline literals.

```suggestion
: Actions that are available when viewing a specific content item.
```

Object Buttons

> : `Actions that are displayed as buttons when viewing a specific content item.`

Reviewer: Same as above, but with an extra line for author readability.

```suggestion
: Actions that are displayed as buttons when viewing a specific content item.

```

Portal Tabs

> : `Actions that are displayed as tabs on the top of the page.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Actions that are displayed as tabs on the top of the page.
```

Site Actions

> : `Actions that are available on every page of your site`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Actions that are available on every page of your site.
```

User Actions

> : `Actions that are available to users when they are logged in to your site`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Actions that are available to users when they are logged in to your site.
```

Each of these action categories serves a different purpose and is intended for use in specific areas of the site.
For example, object actions are intended for actions that are specific to a particular content item, while site actions are intended for actions that are available on every page of your site.

## Expressions

An expression is a piece of code that is evaluated at runtime and can be used to insert dynamic values into the URL or provide the decision for the condition.

```{todo}
Contribute to this documentation!
A chapter about expressions is missing. As soon as it exists a link to this chapter needs to be placed here.
See issue [Backend > missing chapter Expressions needs content](https://github.com/plone/documentation/issues/1370).
```

## Adding or editing portal actions

> To add or edit portal actions, you can use the Portal Actions control panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add or edit portal actions, you can use the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel.
```

> To access this, log in to your Plone site as a user with the appropriate permissions, and then go to the {guilabel}`Site Setup` page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access this, log in to your Plone site as a user with the appropriate permissions.
Then select the menu item {menuselection}`[username] > Site Setup`.
```

> From there, click on the {guilabel}`Portal Actions` link in the {guilabel}`Plone Configuration` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From there, click on the {guilabel}`Actions` link in the {guilabel}`General` section.
You can also select {menuselection}`General > Actions` from the Site Setup or any other control panel.
```

> Once you are on the "Actions" control panel, you will see a list of all the existing portal actions for your site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you are on the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel, you will see a list of all the existing portal actions for your site.
```

> To add a new action, click on the {guilabel}`Add new action` button at the top of the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To inspect or edit an existing action's settings, click its {guilabel}`Edit` button.

[insert screenshot from Steve here]

To add a new action, click on the {guilabel}`Add new action` button at the top of the page.
```

![Screen Shot 2022-12-13 at 12 10 24 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/207261098-eb95830a-7691-49cf-a27e-8117e2f88a92.png)

> This will open a form where you can enter the details for your new action, such as the action name, URL, and any additional parameters.

Reviewer: Add screenshot.

![Screen Shot 2022-12-13 at 12 34 27 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/207265955-ab2cccfe-9671-4262-b807-2ba51a615c7f.png)

```suggestion
This will open a form where you can enter select its category and enter an arbitrary ID.
Click the {guilabel}`Add` button to add the action.
The new action should now appear in the actions listing under the selected category.
You can now edit its settings by clicking its {guilabel}`Edit` button.
```

> To edit an existing action, click on the action name in the list to open the action's details page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To edit an existing action's settings, click its {guilabel}`Edit` button.
```

> From there, you can edit the action's properties, such as the name, URL, and parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It's important to note that the ability to add or edit portal actions is only available to users with the appropriate permissions.

> If you do not have the necessary permissions, you will not be able to access the Portal Actions control panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not have the necessary permissions, you will not be able to access the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel.
```

## Exporting or importing portal actions

> You can export action configuration to XML using the built-in GenericSetup export.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can export action configuration to XML using the built-in Generic Setup  Tool export.
```

Then this XML can be imported again within a profile of an add-on package.
Place the file as `actions.xml` in the profile of an add-on.
You can cut out snippets from this file for creating `actions.xml` containing only changed or added parts.

To export all actions:

> - Go to {guilabel}`Site Setup` and choose {guilabel}`Management Interface`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Go to {guilabel}`Site Setup` and choose {guilabel}`Management Interface`.
  You can also select {menuselection}`Advanced > Management Interface` from the Site Setup or any control panel.
```

> - Go to {guilabel}`portal_setup`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click {guilabel}`portal_setup`.
```

> - Click the tab {guilabel}`Export`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click the tab {guilabel}`Export`.
```

> - Choose the checkbox {guilabel}`Actions Providers`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tick the checkbox {guilabel}`Actions Providers`.
```

> - Click the button {guilabel}`Export selected steps` at the end of the page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click the button {guilabel}`Export selected steps` at the end of the page.
```

# Portal Actions

Actions are links or buttons that allow users to perform specific actions on your site.
These actions can be anything from viewing a content item to editing a page, to accessing a specific feature of your site.

```{note}
Actions in Plone are provided by action providers.
There are at least two providers for actions.

-   Portal actions, provided by the actions tool named `portal_actions` in the ZMI
-   Content type actions defined by the Factory Type Information (FTI) of the Types Tool, and named `portal_types` in the ZMI

> Here only the portal actions are described.

Reviewer: For legibility. At first glance, it looked like it was part of the preceding list.

```suggestion

Here only the portal actions are described.
```

These actions can be anything from viewing a content item to editing a page, to accessing a specific feature of your site.

```{note}

> Actions in Plone are provided by Action Providers. There are at least two providers for actions, the Portal Actions, provided by actions tool `portal_actions` (as it is named in the ZMI) and the content type actions defined by the several Factory Type Information's of the Types Tool `portal_types` (ZMI).

Reviewer: Much clearer. Reformatting for legibility. Also an English grammar tweak.

```suggestion
Actions in Plone are provided by action providers.
There are at least two providers for actions.

-   Portal actions, provided by the actions tool named `portal_actions` in the ZMI
-   Content type actions defined by the Factory Type Information (FTI) of the Types Tool, and named `portal_types` in the ZMI
```

## Adding or editing portal actions

To add or edit portal actions, you can use the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel.
To access this, log in to your Plone site as a user with the appropriate permissions.
Then select the menu item {menuselection}`[username] > Site Setup`.
From there, click on the {guilabel}`Actions` link in the {guilabel}`General` section.
You can also select {menuselection}`General > Actions` from the Site Setup or any other control panel.

Once you are on the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel, you will see a list of all the existing portal actions for your site.
To inspect or edit an existing action's settings, click its {guilabel}`Edit` button.

[insert screenshot from Steve here]

> To add a new action, click on the {guilabel}`Add new action` button at the top of the page.

Reviewer: Here's a clean screenshot.

![control-panel-action-edit-settings](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/207550650-2aa3d8c2-d919-4778-8825-1ecce9eae2dd.png)

- save and rename to `portal-actions-edit-settings.png`.
- place in `docs/_static/backend`.
- reference as:

````
```{image} _static/backend/portal-actions-edit-settings.png
:alt: Action Settings editing interface
```
````

> This will open a form where you can enter select its category and enter an arbitrary ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will open a form where you can select its category and enter an arbitrary ID.
```

Click the {guilabel}`Add` button to add the action.
The new action should now appear in the actions listing under the selected category.
You can now edit its settings by clicking its {guilabel}`Edit` button.

To edit an existing action's settings, click its {guilabel}`Edit` button.

It's important to note that the ability to add or edit portal actions is only available to users with the appropriate permissions.
If you do not have the necessary permissions, you will not be able to access the {guilabel}`Portal actions` control panel.

## Exporting or importing portal actions

> You can export action configuration to XML using the built-in Generic Setup  Tool export.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can export action configuration to XML using the built-in Generic Setup Tool export.
```
